# Lab 3: Bouncing Ball

* Program the FPGA to display a "bouncing ball" on a 800x600 [Video Graphics Array](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Video_Graphics_Array) (VGA) monitor (See Section 8 on VGA Port and Subsection 8.1 on VGA System Timing of the [Reference Manual]( https://reference.digilentinc.com/_media/reference/programmable-logic/nexys-a7/nexys-a7_rm.pdf))
  * The Digilent Nexys A7-100T board has a female [VGA connector](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VGA_connector) that can be connected to a VGA monitor via a VGA cable or a [High-Definition Multimedia Interface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HDMI) (HDMI) monitor via a VGA-to-HDMI adapter.
  * [VGA video](https://web.mit.edu/6.111/www/s2004/NEWKIT/vga.shtml) uses separate wires to transmit the three color component signals and vertical and horizontal synchronization signals.
  * [Horizontal blanking interval](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Horizontal_blanking_interval) consists of front porch, sync pulse, and back porch.
  * [Color mixing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color_mixing) of the red and green lights is yellow, the green and blue lights is cyan, and the blue and red lights is magenta.

* 2019-11-03 pull request by Peter Ho with the 800x600@60Hz support for 100MHz clock
  * The Xilinx [Clocking Wizard](https://www.xilinx.com/products/intellectual-property/clocking_wizard.html)
  * [7 Series FPGAs Clocking Resources User Guide](https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/user_guides/ug472_7Series_Clocking.pdf)

* The **_vga_sync_** module uses a clock to drive horizontal and vertical counters h_cnt and v_cnt, respectively.
  * These counters are then used to generate the various timing signals.
  * The vertical and horizontal sync waveforms, vsync and hsync, will go directly to the VGA display with the column and row address, pixel_col and pixel_row, of the current pixel being displayed.
  * This module also takes as input the current red, green, and blue video data and gates it with a signal called video_on.
  * This ensures that no video is sent to the display during the sync and blanking periods.
  * Note that red, green, and blue video are each represented as 1-bit (on-off) quantities.
  * This is sufficient resolution for our application.

* The **_ball_** module will be used to generate the red, green, and blue video that will paint the ball on to the VGA display at its current position.
  * This module maintains signals ball_x and ball_y that represent the current position of the ball on the screen.
  * These are initialized to (400, 300) to start the ball in the center of the screen.
  * The module also maintains a signal ball_y_motion that represents the number of pixels that the ball should move in one frame period.
  * This is initialized to +4 pixels/frame.
  * The module generates one-bit red, green, and blue video signals that are normally all set to 1.
  * This produces a white screen background.
  * When the signal ball_on is set, the green and blue signals go to 0 that makes those pixels red.
  * The module takes as input the current pixel row and column address that is generated by the vga_sync module.
  * Whenever the ball position is within 8 pixels of the current pixel address (in both x and y directions), the process bdraw sets the signal ball_on.
  * This paints a red ball around the current pixel address.
  * A second process mball (activated by the vsync signal) updates the ball position once every frame.
  * When the ball reaches the top of the screen, it changes the ball motion to -4 pixels per frame.
  * When it reaches the bottom of the screen it changes the ball motion to +4 pixels per frame.

* The **_vga_top_** module will connect the **_vga_sync_** and **_ball_** modules together and connect the appropriate signals to the board.

### 1. Create a new RTL project _vgaball_ in Vivado Quick Start

* Create five new source files of file type VHDL called **_clk_wiz_0_**, **_clk_wiz_0_clk_wiz_**, **_vga_sync_**, **_ball_**, and **_vga_top_**

* Create a new constraint file of file type XDC called **_vga_top_**

* Choose Nexys A7-100T board for the project

* Click 'Finish'

* Click design sources and copy the VHDL code from clk_wiz_0.vhd, clk_wiz_0_clk_wiz.vhd, vga_sync.vhd, ball.vhd, and vga_top.vhd

* Click constraints and copy the code from vga_top.xdc

### 2. Run synthesis

### 3. Run implementation and open implemented design

### 4. Generate bitstream, open hardware manager, and program device

* Click 'Generate Bitstream'

* Click 'Open Hardware Manager' and click 'Open Target' then 'Auto Connect'

* Click 'Program Device' then xc7a100t_0 to download vga_top.bit to the Nexys A7 board

### 5. Edit code with the following [modifications](https://github.com/kevinwlu/dsd/tree/master/Nexys-A7/Lab-3/Modifications)

* Change the size and color of the ball

* Change the square ball to a round ball

* Introduce a new signal ball_x_motion to allow the ball to move both horizontally and vertically

### 6. Close project

* File > Close Project
